# Context

Modules typically handle two types of data that benefit from persistent secure storage and management: module settings and user settings and secrets.
This module introduces the concept of `Contexts`, which enable persistent and secure data storage for PowerShell modules. It allows module developers to
separate user and module data from the module code, enabling users to resume their work without needing to reconfigure the module or log in again,
provided the service supports session refresh mechanisms (e.g., refresh tokens).

The module uses NaCl-based encryption, provided by the `libsodium` library, to encrypt and decrypt `Context` data. The module that delivers this
functionality is called [`Sodium`](https://github.com/PSModule/Sodium) and is a dependency of this module. The
[`Sodium`](https://github.com/PSModule/Sodium) module is automatically installed when you install this module.

## What is a `Context`?

The concept of `Context` is widely used to represent a collection of data that is relevant to a specific use-case. In this module,
a `Context` is a way to securely persist user and module data and offers a set of functions to manage this across modules that implement it.
Data that is stored in a `Context` can include user-specific settings, secrets, and module configuration data.
A `Context` is identified by a unique ID, which is typically a string that represents the module and user of a module (e.g., `GitHub/john_doe`), but
this is just an example. Any data that can be represented in JSON format can be stored in a `Context`.

When saving a `Context` using `Set-Context`, data is first converted to plain-text JSON, then encrypted before being saved to disk. `SecureStrings` are
marked with a special `[SECURESTRING]` prefix to indicate that they should be restored to a `SecureString`. When the `Context` is accessed using
`Get-Context`, the data is read from disk and decrypted, restoring it as an object. Any `SecureString` values are restored to a `SecureString` within
that object.

### 1. Storing data (object or dictionary) to disk using `Set-Context`

The `Set-Context` function is called to store a `Context` object or dictionary to disk. The function takes an ID and a context object as parameters.
The context object can be a PowerShell object or a dictionary (hashtable).

```pwsh
Set-Context -ID 'john_doe' -Context ([PSCustomObject]@{
    Username          = 'john_doe'
    AuthToken         = 'ghp_12345ABCDE67890FGHIJ' | ConvertTo-SecureString -AsPlainText -Force # gitleaks:allow
    LoginTime         = Get-Date
    IsTwoFactorAuth   = $true
    TwoFactorMethods  = @('TOTP', 'SMS')
})
```

### 2. The object is converted to JSON and prepared for encryption

When the `Set-Context` function is called, the object is converted to JSON format. If the context object contains any `SecureString` values, they are
marked with a `[SECURESTRING]` prefix. This indicates that these values should be restored as `SecureString` objects when the context is retrieved.

```json
{
    "ID": "john_doe",
    "Username": "john_doe",
    "AuthToken": "[SECURESTRING]ghp_12345ABCDE67890FGHIJ",
    "LoginTime": "2024-11-21T21:16:56.2518249+01:00",
    "IsTwoFactorAuth": true,
    "TwoFactorMethods": ["TOTP", "SMS"]
}
```

### 3. Storing the context object to disk

When the context object is ready, it is encrypted using the `Sodium` module and saved to disk in a secure location. The file path is typically
`$HOME\.contextvault\<context_id>.json`, where `<context_id>` is a GUID that is auto generated by the module and provides a unique name for the file.
The JSON representation of the user data is added as an encrypted string to another object that holds metadata about the `Context`, like a unique ID
and info about the file that holds the `Context`. The metadata can be accessed using the `Get-ContextInfo` function.

```json
{
    "ID": "PSModule.GitHub/github.com/john_doe",
    "Path": "C:\\Users\\JohnDoe\\.contextvault\\d2edaa6e-95a1-41a0-b6ef-0ecc5d116030.json",
    "Context": "0kGmtbQiEtih7 --< encrypted context data >-- ceqbMiBilUvEzO1Lk"
}
```

## Installation

You can install the module from the PowerShell Gallery using the following command:

```powershell
Install-PSResource -Name Context -TrustRepository -Repository PSGallery
Import-Module -Name Context
```

## Usage

Let's take a closer look at how to store these types of data using the module.

### Module Settings

A module developer can create additional `Contexts` for settings that share the same lifecycle, such as those associated with a module extension.

For example, if we have a module called `GitHub` that needs to store some settings, the module developer could initialize a `Context` called `GitHub`
as part of the loading section in the module code. The module configuration is accessed using the ID `GitHub`.

### User Configuration

To store user data, a module developer can create a `Context` that serves as a "namespace" for user-specific configurations.

Imagine a user named `BobMarley` logs into the `GitHub` module. The following logical structure would be created:

- `GitHub`: Contains module configuration, like default user, host, and client ID.
- `GitHub/BobMarley`: Contains user configuration, secrets, and default values for API calls.

If the same user logs in with another account (`LennyKravitz`), an additional `Context` will be created:

- `GitHub/LennyKravitz`: Contains user-specific settings and secrets.

This allows users to set a default `Context`, storing its name in the module `Context`, enabling automatic login to the correct account when the
module loads. Users can also switch between accounts by changing the default `Context`.

### Setup for a New Module

1. Create a new context for the module:

```pwsh
Set-Context -ID 'GitHub' -Context @{ Name = 'GitHub' }
```

2. Add module configuration:

```pwsh
$context = Get-Context -ID 'GitHub'
# Modify settings as needed
Set-Context -ID 'GitHub' -Context $context
```

### Setup for a New User Context

1. Create a set of public integration functions using the `Context` module to store user data. This is highly recommended, as it allows module
developers to define a structured `Context` while providing users with familiar function names for interaction.
   - `Set-<ModuleName>Context` that uses `Set-Context`.
   - `Get-<ModuleName>Context` that uses `Get-Context`.
   - `Remove-<ModuleName>Context` that uses `Remove-Context`.

2. Create a new `Context` for the user:

```pwsh
Connect-GitHub ...
Set-Context -ID 'GitHub.BobMarley'
```

3. Modify user configuration:

```pwsh
$context = Get-Context -ID 'GitHub.BobMarley'
# Modify settings
Set-Context -ID 'GitHub.BobMarley' -Context $context
```

4. Retrieve user configuration:

```pwsh
Get-Context -ID 'GitHub/BobMarley'
```

## Contributing

### For Users

Even if you don’t code, your insights can help improve the project. If you experience unexpected behavior, errors, or missing functionality, submit a
bug or feature request in the project's issue tracker.

### For Developers

If you code, we'd love your contributions! Please read the [Contribution Guidelines](CONTRIBUTING.md) for more details.

## Links

- Sodium [GitHub](https://github.com/PSModule/Sodium) | [PSGallery](https://www.powershellgallery.com/packages/Sodium)
